---
layout: post
title: "[Part 1] How I set up ETW for logging (native, .NET, Metro and UApp)"
location: "Japan"
categories: ["Code"]
comments: true
---

Check out the codes in [GitHub](https://github.com/idrilsilverfoot/win32-etw-manifest).

Ive been using ETW as my go-to logging mechanism for Windows development. I will be sharing how I setup my environment here.

# Creating the manifest file (.man)

I use `ecmangen.exe` to create my manifest file. This tool is included in the SDK. I have Visual Studio 2015 installed on a Win10 64-bit machine, and its location is `C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Kits\10\bin\x64\`. It looks something like this (my completed manifest):

{% include image.html url="../../../../images/etw1.png" %}

The red strip is the manifest file name, or my ETW provider name.

I started by right-clicking Events Section -> New -> Provider, then gave it a name. Then prepended the string Provider to the existing name for the Symbol, auto-generated the GUID, left the other fields as blank, then Save.

# Setting up Keywords

{% include image.html url="../../../../images/etw2.png" %}

Keywords basically is a mask for filtering log outputs. Mine is just a simple logging mechanism so I have only two keywords. Im not even using `KeywordFunctionEntryExit` (set to 0x1) that much nowadays so `KeywordGeneric` (set to 0x2) for me is enough. With this, I have the option later to output only the logs with the keyword `KeywordFunctionEntryExit` or `KeywordGeneric`, or both.

# Setting up Templates

{% include image.html url="../../../../images/etw3.png" %}

Templates are, well, templates for the events (in this context, a log is basically an event). Templates will contain the fields (with data types) I want to include in my log. My goal was to have logs with a format of `[module_name: src_file_name:  function_name] key: value`, where `key` would be any label, say, variable name, and `value` as, well, any value, be it int or bool, or last error, etc. I thought that this format is generic enough for me to log any information from my code.

All events require a template (whether your template or default, which I admit I have never used). Multiple events can use a single template.

# Setting up Events

{% include image.html url="../../../../images/etw4.png" %}

Lastly, the events themselves. From the image above, I defined quite a number of events. If you noticed, my `LastError` event (which I use to log the `GetLastError()` API) specified the template `TemplateKeyValueLastError` and the keyword `KeywordGeneric`.

When the manifest file is compiled, all the defined events by default (can be modified during compilation) will generate a logging API with the name `EventWrite<event_name>`, which in the case of the highlighted one, `EventWriteLastError()`.

Another thing to point out is the `Message`. The `%[number]` corresponds to the fields defined in the template used. First field will be %1, second field will be %2, and so on and so on.

Lastly, save your manifest file. The xml file will have a `.man` extension.

Check out [part 2](http://flowerinthenight.com/blog/2016/03/02/etw-part2).
